 
 Jane Street Blog - Using group theory to explore the space of positional encodings for attention 
 Home 
 All Posts 
 Machine Learning 
 Authors Index 
 Jane Street 
 Subscribe to email updates 
 Subscribe to Email Updates 
 Featured Reads 
 Read more 
 Using ASCII waveforms to test hardware designs 
 Read more 
 Finding memory leaks with Memtrace 
 Tags 
 async 
 book 
 c 
 camlp4 
 code-review 
 comments 
 compiler 
 core 
 hackerschool 
 hg 
 incremental 
 internship 
 interviewing 
 machine-learning 
 ocaml 
 parallel-programming 
 performance 
 ppx 
 real-world-ocaml 
 registers 
 speed 
 ui 
 Get the RSS feed 
 Jane Street Open Source 
 Join Our Team 
 Using group theory to explore the space of positional encodings for attention 
 Apr 22, 2026 | 
 13 min read
 Share on Facebook 
 Share on Twitter 
 Share on LinkedIn 
 By: Alok Puranik 
 Attention is a computational primitive at the core of modern language models, allowing
internal representations to reference and influence each other. It’s how these models
handle sequential data in the first place. 
 Yet, naively implemented, attention doesn’t have any notion of position. In the core
attention computation, you calculate the dot product between a given “query” and a “key,”
which tells you how much to attend to the value at that key—and this dot product says
nothing about where in the sequence the queries and keys are. Since in most settings that
information matters a great deal, you generally want to somehow perturb your dot-product
calculation so that it depends on the positions (usually just the relative positions) of
the query and key. 
 The so-called “positional encoding” that you use represents an important modeling
decision, because it governs how the model views the passage of time. The most popular
positional encoding, called RoPE, rotates components of key and query vectors by an angle
that depends on the position in the sequence, like the hands of a clock. This works well
in practice, but it’s far from the only option. 
 On a recent Friday afternoon I wondered, well, what are all the options? I’m an ML
researcher at Jane Street, and when we’re working with sequential models we’ve often
debated whether we’re using the best positional encoding. This raises the question: what
positional encodings are even possible? As I started investigating, I discovered to my
surprise that the space is quite constrained. 
 The reason is that there are a few key properties that any desirable positional encoding
should have, and once you formalize those, you’re left with a very particular mathematical
structure. (Spoiler: a one-parameter
group .) In exploring that
structure, I was able to show that there are only a few families of valid positional
encoding—the demonstration of that fact forms the bulk of this blog post—and actually all
of the sensible ones are already being used in real systems. 
 It was a reassuring finding, because it means that we don’t need to rack our brains to
come up with some perfect positional encoding, as we are probably already using it. Even
so, in doing this analysis I did discover a strange, unlikely-to-work-out-in-practice, but
technically legal class of positional encodings that seems to be totally unexplored. 
 Formalizing a positional encoding 
 Let’s suppose we have a time series of queries ,
and a time series of keys . We write and
 as functions of time so that we can accommodate continuous or irregularly sampled
inputs, but we could just as well restrict ourselves to only integer times if we prefer.
“Time” here is a stand-in for any increasing quantity that we might care to use to
measure progression through a sequence; it could be a sequence index, or literal elapsed
time in a time series modeling problem, or even some kind of learned notion of time, as
used in the Mamba family of models. We’re only concerned with the time-dependent
aspects of the positional encoding, so we’ll allow ourselves to apply certain
time-independent operations, most notably changes of basis, to and without
really considering the positional encoding to have changed. (When and are
produced by linear layers in neural networks, the basis is arbitrary anyway.) 
 In the absence of positional encodings, attention would require us to compute inner
products like . We want to modify these inner products to encode the
progression of time. For the sake of computational efficiency, we won’t modify every
pairwise inner product independently; instead we’ll transform the queries and keys
themselves, using some explicitly time-dependent functions
 and
 . We’ll set
 , , so that the attention score of the pair
 becomes . We’ve assumed here that and don’t change
the dimension of our queries and keys, which we may do without loss of generality. (If we
wanted a different dimension, we could have applied a time-independent projection to our
keys and queries prior to the positional encoding.) Now let’s add some more restrictions. 
 Properties of good positional encodings 
 Linearity: is linear in , and is linear in . This one
isn’t rigorously justifiable, but we’re working with a vector space, so it’s only right
that our encoding should be linear. We’ll leave the study of nonlinear encodings to
others. 
 Linearity ensures that we can write and
 , with and being square matrices. Now our
attention dot product is 
 We can see at this point that any positional encoding scheme will be fully characterized
by the square matrix , which determines how we modify the inner product
between times and . 
 Translation invariance: For any times and , we have
 . This property ensures that only relative positions
are observable, which will help with generalization to longer sequences, among other
things. (If the absolute index is observable in your positional encoding, what do you do
when you train on sequences only up to length , and now need to deal with a longer
one?) 
 If you consider computing pairwise as you range over and , you
get a table like: 
 \(s = 0\) 
 \(s = 1\) 
 \(s = 2\) 
 \(t = 0\) 
 \(F(0)^\top G(0)\) 
 \(F(0)^\top G(1)\) 
 \(F(0)^\top G(2)\) 
 \(t = 1\) 
 \(F(1)^\top G(0)\) 
 \(F(1)^\top G(1)\) 
 \(F(1)^\top G(2)\) 
 \(t = 2\) 
 \(F(2)^\top G(0)\) 
 \(F(2)^\top G(1)\) 
 \(F(2)^\top G(2)\) 
 Translation invariance is basically just saying that all you need to care about are the
diagonals in this table, since by assumption along the diagonals the values will be equal. 
 We make one more assumption, namely that . Effectively this is
saying that for equal times, our positional encoding modification simply drops out. (We
can do this without loss of generality, because if we’d started with
 instead, we could have folded into the keys by redefining
 , and as usual we’re happy to ignore such time-independent
transformations.) Therefore by translation invariance. And since the
matrices are square, we also now know that and are inverses, so
 is also equal to . 
 Let’s define a new matrix-valued function . You can think of
 as giving a single value for each of the diagonals in the table above: 
 \(s = 0\) 
 \(s = 1\) 
 \(s = 2\) 
 \(t = 0\) 
 \(A(0)\) 
 \(A(-1)\) 
 \(A(-2)\) 
 \(t = 1\) 
 \(A(1)\) 
 \(A(0)\) 
 \(A(-1)\) 
 \(t = 2\) 
 \(A(2)\) 
 \(A(1)\) 
 \(A(0)\) 
 says how much you should perturb the inner product when shifted by . In
other words, is a translation across time that brings the key from the
past, at time , to the present, at time , where it can be compared to .
This key piece of intuition simultaneously suggests that: 
 Shifting by should be a no-op 
 Shifting by and then by should be the same as shifting by 
 And indeed, thanks to the assumptions above we can immediately conclude that
 , and that: 
 The property is a very powerful constraint. If you’re familiar with
group theory, the family of matrices form a one-parameter
group as long as we require that
 is continuous in . This fact makes our enumeration possible, because such
groups are well understood. So our last assumption is: 
 Continuity: is a continuous function of . There are discontinuous
functions that satisfy our constraints, but they require the axiom of choice to describe
and are far too deranged to implement on a physical computer. 
 Enumerating all the representations 
 Remember that we’re trying to use these constraints to characterize the space of possible
positional encodings. The fact that any positional encoding under the above assumptions
must be a one-parameter group lets us bring known results about one-parameter groups to
bear against this problem. 
 In particular, we know that every one-parameter matrix group has the form for some fixed generator matrix . So now our task comes down to
determining how the choice of generator affects our encoding. The presence of a matrix
exponential hints that we should try to diagonalize . 
 Diagonalizable generators 
 There’s a lot more we can say when is diagonalizable. Through a time-independent
change of basis that we may fold into our keys and values, we can convert to have
the form: 
 Diagonalizing is convenient because it lets us chop up our positional encoding into
non-interacting components. More precisely, our -dimensional vector space is
decomposable into a direct sum of different 1-dimensional vector spaces, where our
positional encoding acts on each 1D space separately via multiplication by
 . 
 When we do this decomposition, we encounter a problem: the new basis will in general be
complex, not real, and the resulting diagonal matrix will also have complex
entries in general. However, if the original un-diagonalized was real, then after
diagonalization, the non-real values will come in conjugate pairs. We will therefore pick
a slightly coarser direct sum decomposition: real diagonal elements get cut into their own
subspaces, and pairs of conjugate diagonal elements get 2D subspaces, where acts
like: 
 Here denotes the conjugate of . 
 The action of on a 1D subspace corresponds to exponential decay or blowup. We can
write the single diagonal value of as the scalar , for some real
 . Recalling how operates on products, we find that restricted to this
subspace, . That allows us to contemplate a few
cases: 
 If we have , then the influence of key blows up exponentially as time proceeds. This is clearly impractical—you don’t want your attention to increase exponentially as the time gap increases—so we throw out this possibility. 
 When , our positional encoding is everywhere, and we’ve recovered NoPE. 
 When , exponentially suppresses the influence of key as
time goes on, and we recover the exponential decay that so commonly appears in linear
attention variants. Note that when analyzing gated models, which learn a data-dependent
decay factor, from the lens of positional encoding, we should think of them as learning
how far to advance time, as opposed to changing the rate of decay. (Also note that the
 case only makes sense when we are running causal attention, where the future
is masked out. Otherwise tokens in the far future have exponentially increased influence
on our early queries, which presents its own problems.) 
 The action of on the 2D subspaces can be rewritten in polar form as: 
 with and real. The role of in this subspace is exactly the same as
in the 1D subspace, so we’ll require . 
 To connect to something more familiar, we’ll first note that: 
 can be converted by change of basis into the 2D rotation matrix . This is called the real canonical form,
and as long as our original matrix was real, the change of basis required to convert
it to blocks of this form will also be real. We can implement our choice
 by taking , so .
We can immediately check that 
 and 
 Here you can see how and behave as we vary and : 
 Thus and are constant-frequency rotations on our query and key subspaces.
We’ve derived RoPE, with a new exponential damping factor induced by . This
exponentially damped RoPE is the positional encoding used in
 RetNet and
 Mamba-3 , among others. 
 Defective generators 
 Finally, let’s examine the possibility that our generator is a defective matrix, and
thus not diagonalizable. Instead, when we put it in Jordan normal form, we find that
Jordan blocks appear around repeated eigenvalues. For simplicity, we can assume for now
that consists entirely of one Jordan block. 
 To get some intuition for what happens here, let’s analyze the defective matrix
 . This matrix satisfies ,
and therefore
 . If we
apply to a 2D vector , we get the result . 
 This is not just some mathematical pathology; this choice of appears naturally in
certain dynamical systems. Consider a frictionless hockey puck launched from position
 with velocity at time . At time , its new position is , and
its velocity remains . The time evolution of this simple physical system is governed
precisely by . 
 Our analysis above covered only the simplest case where the Jordan block had the shared
eigenvalue , but we can visualize the more general case of a real shared eigenvalue
 , which adds exponential decays to the mix: 
 The complex eigenvalue case is messier—the simplest examples involve a
 Jordan block involving a conjugate pair of doubled eigenvalues—but
there’s nothing fundamentally new there, and the analysis is left as an exercise to the
reader. 
 In general, unlike diagonalizable matrices which produce only exponential and
trigonometric factors, defective matrices give rise to positional encodings involving
polynomial terms. Whereas exponential factors produce time decay and rotations produce a
sort of analog clock, it’s entirely unclear how to interpret these polynomials in the
context of attention. I failed to find any existing literature which directly addresses
the possibility of defective generators for positional encodings in deep learning, and
most likely they have no practical application. Nevertheless, the curious possibility
remains. 
 Addendum: ALiBi 
 @StefanGliga pointed out on X that the restriction to only
linear functions of and narrows the space of positional encodings so much that
it excludes ALiBi, which applies a penalty to the attention dot product. And it’s true
that the assumptions made in this post don’t cover the class of positional encodings which
map the dot product to for some arbitrary
function . But ALiBi was a particularly interesting example to use, because that
particular encoding is possible (though admittedly impractical) to implement with linear
positional encodings, as long as we augment our queries and keys appropriately. Let’s see
how. 
 ALiBi takes the dot product and replaces it with
 , where is a constant chosen per-head. The first term is
trivial to produce, so we just need to construct a dot product that evaluates to .
This means we need a generator matrix that can grow a component linearly in time. We met
exactly such a matrix in the defective generators section:
 , which satisfies
 . Now we’d like to
pick 2D time-independent and vectors such that
 . We can set 
and , and we find: 
 So, intentionally or otherwise, Stefan found a useful example of a positional encoding
generated by a defective matrix! 
 Addendum: Group Representational Positional Encoding (GRAPE) 
 While writing this post, I somehow missed this recent paper 
by Zhang et al. which attacks a closely related problem and points out the connection
between defective generators and ALiBi. Roughly speaking, while this post tries to
enumerate a universe of positional encodings, the GRAPE paper demonstrates the utility of
certain classes of positional encodings using essentially the same framework of
one-parameter groups. Thanks to Yifan Zhang for noticing the connection between this blog
post and his research. 
 Alok has been a researcher at Jane Street since 2020. When not training
neural networks, he enjoys running and pretending to understand theoretical
physics.
 #machine-learning 
 prev ious post 
 next post 
 Subscribe to Email Updates 
 Signals & Threads Podcast 
 Listen to the latest episode 
 Featured Tech Talk 
 The Algorithm for Precision Medicine 
 Jane Street YouTube Channel 
 Featured Reads 
 Read more 
 Using ASCII waveforms to test hardware designs 
 Read more 
 Finding memory leaks with Memtrace 
 Tags 
 async 
 book 
 c 
 camlp4 
 code-review 
 comments 
 compiler 
 core 
 hackerschool 
 hg 
 incremental 
 internship 
 interviewing 
 machine-learning 
 ocaml 
 parallel-programming 
 performance 
 ppx 
 real-world-ocaml 
 registers 
 speed 
 ui 
 RSS 
 Get the RSS feed 
 Jane Street Open Source 
 From committing patches to the Linux kernel to releasing our own projects, we’re always looking for ways to participate in the open source community. 
 Join Our Team 
 Where FP meets the real world. 
 If you're interested in working at a place where functional programming meets the real world, then apply for a job at Jane Street. 
 Learn more 
 Who We Are 
 What We Do 
 Client Offering 
 The Latest 
 Culture 
 Join Jane Street 
 Contact Us 
 Disclosures & Policies 
 © Copyright 2015-2026 Jane Street Group, LLC. All rights reserved. Services are provided in the U.S. by Jane Street Capital, LLC and Jane Street Execution Services, LLC, each of which is a SEC-registered broker dealer and member of FINRA ( www.finra.org ). Regulated activities are undertaken in Europe by Jane Street Financial Limited, an investment firm authorized and regulated by the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority, and Jane Street Netherlands B.V., an investment firm authorized and regulated by the Netherlands Authority for the Financial Markets ( Autoriteit Financiële Markten ), and in Hong Kong by Jane Street Hong Kong Limited, a regulated entity under the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (CE No. BAL548). Each of these entities is a wholly owned subsidiary of Jane Street Group, LLC. This material is provided for informational purposes only and does not constitute an offer or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any security or other financial instrument. | Jane Street and the concentric circle mark are registered trademarks of Jane Street.
 Privacy 
 Cookies 
 Jane Street Group, LLC uses cookies and similar technologies, including third-party cookies, on this Site to provide basic functionalities and perform analytics. You may accept or decline cookies by selecting “Accept” or “Reject”. For information regarding our cookie practices, see Jane Street’s
 Ad and Cookie Policy .
 Accept All 
 Reject All 
